doc/fileformats.rst, before:

File formats
============

We've tried to use standard file formats where possible in CNVkit. However, in a
few cases we have needed to extend the standard BED format to accommodate
additional information.

All of the non-standard file formats used by CNVkit are tab-separated plain text
and can be loaded in a spreadsheet program, R or other statistical analysis
software for manual analysis, if desired.

.. _bedformat:

BED and GATK/Picard Interval List
---------------------------------

- UCSC Genome Browser's `BED definition and FAQ <http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1>`_
- GATK's `Interval List description
  <https://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/guide/article?id=1204>`_ and `FAQ
  <https://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/guide/article?id=1319>`_

Note that BED genomic coordinates are 0-indexed, like C or Python code -- for
example, the first nucleotide of a 1000-basepair sequence has position 0, the
last nucleotide has position 999, and the entire region is indicated by the
range 0-1000.

Interval list coordinates are 1-indexed, like R or Matlab code. In the same
example, the first nucleotide of a 1000-basepair sequence has position 1, the
last nucleotide has position 1000, and the entire region is indicated by the
range 1-1000.


.. _vcfformat:

VCF
---

See the `VCF specifications <https://github.com/samtools/hts-specs>`_.

CNVkit currently uses VCF files in two ways:

- To extract single-nucleotide variant (SNV) allele frequencies, which can be
  plotted in the :ref:`scatter` command, used to assign allele-specific copy
  number in the :ref:`call` command, or exported along with bin-level copy
  ratios to the "nexus-ogt" format.
- To :ref:`export` CNVs, describing/encoding each CNV segment as a structural
  variant (SV).

For the former -- investigating allelic imbalance and loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) -- it's most useful to perform paired calling on matched tumor/normal
samples. You can use a separate SNV caller such as FreeBayes, VarDict, or MuTect
to do this. For best results, ensure that:

- Both the tumor and normal samples are present in the same VCF file.
- Include both germline and somatic variants (if any) in the VCF file.
  (For MuTect, this means keeping the "REJECT" records.)
  Mark somatic variants with the "SOMATIC" flag in the INFO column.
- Add a PEDIGREE tag to the VCF header declaring the tumor sample(s) as
  "Derived" and the normal as "Original". Without this tag, you'll need to tell
  CNVkit which sample is which using the `-i` and `-n` options in each command.

An `example VCF
<https://github.com/etal/cnvkit/blob/master/test/formats/na12878_na12882_mix.vcf?raw=true>`_
constructed from the 1000 Genomes samples NA12878 and NA12882 is included in
CNVkit's test suite.


Target and antitarget bin-level coverages (.cnn)
------------------------------------------------

CNVkit saves its information in a tabular format similar to BED, but with
additional columns.  Each row in the file indicates an on-target or off-target
(a.k.a. "antitarget") bin. Genomic coordinates are 0-indexed, like BED.
Column names are shown as the first line of the file.

In the output of the :ref:`coverage` command, the columns are:

* Chromosome or reference sequence name (``chromosome``)
* Start position (``start``)
* End position (``end``)
* Gene name (``gene``)
* Log2 mean coverage depth (``log2``)
* Absolute-scale mean coverage depth (``depth``)

Essentially the same tabular file format is used for coverages (.cnn), ratios
(.cnr) and segments (.cns) emitted by CNVkit.


Copy number reference profile (.cnn)
------------------------------------

In addition to the columns present in the "target" and "antitarget" .cnn files,
the reference .cnn file has the columns:

* GC content of the sequence region (``gc``)
* RepeatMasker-masked proportion of the sequence region (``rmask``)
* Statistical spread or dispersion (``spread``)

The **log2** coverage depth is the robust average of coverage depths,
excluding extreme outliers, observed at the corresponding bin in each the sample
.cnn files used to construct the :ref:`reference`. The **spread** is a similarly
robust estimate of the standard deviation of normalized log2 coverages in the
bin. The **depth** column is the robust average of absolute-scale coverage
depths from the input .cnn files, but without any bias corrections.

To manually review potentially problematic targets in the built reference, you
can sort the file by the **spread** column; bins with higher values are the
noisy ones.

It is important to keep the copy number reference file consistent for the
duration of a project, reusing the same reference for bias correction of all
tumor samples in a cohort.
If your library preparation protocol changes, it's usually best to build a new
reference file and use the new file to analyze the samples prepared under the
new protocol.


Bin-level log2 ratios (.cnr)
----------------------------

In addition to the ``chromosome``, ``start``, ``end``, ``gene``, ``log2`` and
``depth`` columns present in .cnn files, the .cnr file includes each bin's
proportional weight or reliability (``weight``).

The **weight** value is derived from several sources:

- The size of the bin relative to the average bin size (for targets or
  antitargets, separately)
- For a paired or pooled reference, the deviation of the reference log2 value
  from neutral coverage (i.e. distance from 0.0)
- For a pooled reference, the inverse of the variance (i.e. square of ``spread``
  in the reference) of normalized log2 coverage values seen among all normal
  samples at that bin.

This calculated value is used to weight the bin log2 ratio values during
segmentation.
Also, when a genomic region is plotted with CNVkit's "scatter" command, the size
of the plotted datapoints is proportional to each bin's weight -- a relatively
small point indicates a less reliable bin.


Segmented log2 ratios (.cns)
----------------------------

In addition to the ``chromosome``, ``start``, ``end``, ``gene``, ``log2``,
``depth`` and ``weight`` columns present in .cnr files, the .cns file format has
the additional column ``probes``, indicating the number of bins covered by the
segment.

The **gene** column concatenates the gene names of all the bins that the segment
covers. The **weight** column sums the bin-level weights, and the **depth** and
**log2** is the weighted mean of the input bin-level values corresponding to
the segment.

Commit message:

doc: Mention GATK4's redefinition of the interval list format

doc/fileformats.rst, after:

File formats
============

We've tried to use standard file formats where possible in CNVkit. However, in a
few cases we have needed to extend the standard BED format to accommodate
additional information.

All of the non-standard file formats used by CNVkit are tab-separated plain text
and can be loaded in a spreadsheet program, R or other statistical analysis
software for manual analysis, if desired.

.. _bedformat:

BED and GATK/Picard Interval List
---------------------------------

- UCSC Genome Browser's `BED definition and FAQ <http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html#format1>`_
- GATK's `Interval List description
  <https://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/guide/article?id=1204>`_ and `FAQ
  <https://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/guide/article?id=1319>`_

Note that BED genomic coordinates are 0-indexed, like C or Python code -- for
example, the first nucleotide of a 1000-basepair sequence has position 0, the
last nucleotide has position 999, and the entire region is indicated by the
range 0-1000.

GATK and Picard interval list coordinates are 1-indexed, like R or Matlab code.
In the same example, the first nucleotide of a 1000-basepair sequence has
position 1, the last nucleotide has position 1000, and the entire region is
indicated by the range 1-1000. These files usually have the extension
`.interval_list`.

In GATK4, the term "interval list" also refers to samtools-style genomic
coordinate specifications of the form *chromosome:start-end*, e.g.
`chr1:1-1000`. As with Picard and older GATK style interval lists, the
coordinates are 1-indexed. When used with GATK4, these files usually have the
extension `.list` or `.interval`.

CNVkit will load these files by automatically determining the specific format
based on the file contents, not the filename extension.


.. _vcfformat:

VCF
---

See the `VCF specifications <https://github.com/samtools/hts-specs>`_.

CNVkit currently uses VCF files in two ways:

- To extract single-nucleotide variant (SNV) allele frequencies, which can be
  plotted in the :ref:`scatter` command, used to assign allele-specific copy
  number in the :ref:`call` command, or exported along with bin-level copy
  ratios to the "nexus-ogt" format.
- To :ref:`export` CNVs, describing/encoding each CNV segment as a structural
  variant (SV).

For the former -- investigating allelic imbalance and loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) -- it's most useful to perform paired calling on matched tumor/normal
samples. You can use a separate SNV caller such as FreeBayes, VarDict, or MuTect
to do this. For best results, ensure that:

- Both the tumor and normal samples are present in the same VCF file.
- Include both germline and somatic variants (if any) in the VCF file.
  (For MuTect, this means keeping the "REJECT" records.)
  Mark somatic variants with the "SOMATIC" flag in the INFO column.
- Add a PEDIGREE tag to the VCF header declaring the tumor sample(s) as
  "Derived" and the normal as "Original". Without this tag, you'll need to tell
  CNVkit which sample is which using the `-i` and `-n` options in each command.

An `example VCF
<https://github.com/etal/cnvkit/blob/master/test/formats/na12878_na12882_mix.vcf?raw=true>`_
constructed from the 1000 Genomes samples NA12878 and NA12882 is included in
CNVkit's test suite.


Target and antitarget bin-level coverages (.cnn)
------------------------------------------------

CNVkit saves its information in a tabular format similar to BED, but with
additional columns.  Each row in the file indicates an on-target or off-target
(a.k.a. "antitarget") bin. Genomic coordinates are 0-indexed, like BED.
Column names are shown as the first line of the file.

In the output of the :ref:`coverage` command, the columns are:

* Chromosome or reference sequence name (``chromosome``)
* Start position (``start``)
* End position (``end``)
* Gene name (``gene``)
* Log2 mean coverage depth (``log2``)
* Absolute-scale mean coverage depth (``depth``)

Essentially the same tabular file format is used for coverages (.cnn), ratios
(.cnr) and segments (.cns) emitted by CNVkit.


Copy number reference profile (.cnn)
------------------------------------

In addition to the columns present in the "target" and "antitarget" .cnn files,
the reference .cnn file has the columns:

* GC content of the sequence region (``gc``)
* RepeatMasker-masked proportion of the sequence region (``rmask``)
* Statistical spread or dispersion (``spread``)

The **log2** coverage depth is the robust average of coverage depths,
excluding extreme outliers, observed at the corresponding bin in each the sample
.cnn files used to construct the :ref:`reference`. The **spread** is a similarly
robust estimate of the standard deviation of normalized log2 coverages in the
bin. The **depth** column is the robust average of absolute-scale coverage
depths from the input .cnn files, but without any bias corrections.

To manually review potentially problematic targets in the built reference, you
can sort the file by the **spread** column; bins with higher values are the
noisy ones.

It is important to keep the copy number reference file consistent for the
duration of a project, reusing the same reference for bias correction of all
tumor samples in a cohort.
If your library preparation protocol changes, it's usually best to build a new
reference file and use the new file to analyze the samples prepared under the
new protocol.


Bin-level log2 ratios (.cnr)
----------------------------

In addition to the ``chromosome``, ``start``, ``end``, ``gene``, ``log2`` and
``depth`` columns present in .cnn files, the .cnr file includes each bin's
proportional weight or reliability (``weight``).

The **weight** value is derived from several sources:

- The size of the bin relative to the average bin size (for targets or
  antitargets, separately)
- For a paired or pooled reference, the deviation of the reference log2 value
  from neutral coverage (i.e. distance from 0.0)
- For a pooled reference, the inverse of the variance (i.e. square of ``spread``
  in the reference) of normalized log2 coverage values seen among all normal
  samples at that bin.

This calculated value is used to weight the bin log2 ratio values during
segmentation.
Also, when a genomic region is plotted with CNVkit's "scatter" command, the size
of the plotted datapoints is proportional to each bin's weight -- a relatively
small point indicates a less reliable bin.


Segmented log2 ratios (.cns)
----------------------------

In addition to the ``chromosome``, ``start``, ``end``, ``gene``, ``log2``,
``depth`` and ``weight`` columns present in .cnr files, the .cns file format has
the additional column ``probes``, indicating the number of bins covered by the
segment.

The **gene** column concatenates the gene names of all the bins that the segment
covers. The **weight** column sums the bin-level weights, and the **depth** and
**log2** is the weighted mean of the input bin-level values corresponding to
the segment.
