doc/heterogeneity.rst, before:

Tumor heterogeneity
===================

DNA samples extracted from solid tumors are rarely completely pure. Stromal or
other normal cells and distinct subclonal tumor-cell populations are typically
present in a sample, and can confound attempts to fit segmented log2 ratio
values to absolute integer copy numbers.

CNVkit provides several points of integration with existing tools and methods
for dealing with tumor heterogeneity and normal-cell contamination.

Estimating tumor purity and normal contamination
------------------------------------------------

A rough estimate of tumor purity can usually be obtained using one or more of
these approaches:

1. A pathologist can visually estimate the purity of an sample taken from a
   solid tumor by examination under a microscope, counting stromal and
   neoplastic cells.
2. If the tumor is belived to be driven by a somatic point mutation, e.g. BRAF
   V600E in melanoma, then that mutation is assumed to be fully clonal and its
   allele frequency indicates the tumor purity. This can be complicated by copy
   number alterations at the same site and whether the point mutation is
   homozygous or heterozygous, but the frequencies of other somatic mutations in
   the same sample may resolve this satisfactorily.
3. Larger-scale, hemizygous losses that cover germline heterozygous SNPs shift
   the allele frequencies of the same SNPs as they are present in the tumor
   sample. In a 50% pure tumor sample, for example, these SNP b-allele
   frequencies would shift from 50% to 67% or 33%, assuming a diploid sample
   (i.e. 1 of 2 copies from the normal sample and 0 or 1 of 1 copy from the
   tumor, depending on whether the variant allele was lost or retained). The
   general calculation is a bit more complicated than in #1 or #2, and can be
   done similarly for copy number gains and homozygous deletions.
4. The log2 ratio values of CNAs in a tumor sample correspond to integer copy
   numbers in tumor cells, and in aggregate these log2 values will cluster
   around values that indicate subclone populations, each with a given ploidy
   and clonality. For example, a single-copy loss in a 50% pure tumor sample
   will have 3/4 the coverage of a neutral site (2/2 normal copies, 1/2 tumor
   copies), for a log2 value of log2(.75) = -0.415. This calculation can also be
   generalized to other copy number states.

Software implementations of the latter three approaches can be used directly on
DNA sequencing data.


Inferring tumor purity and subclonal population fractions from sequencing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

While inferring the tumor population structure is currently out of the scope of
CNVkit, this work can be done using other third-party programs such as
`THetA2 <http://compbio.cs.brown.edu/projects/theta/>`_,
`PyClone <http://compbio.bccrc.ca/software/pyclone/>`_, or
`BubbleTree <https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/BubbleTree.html>`_.
Each of these programs can be used to estimate tumor cell content and infer
integer copy number of tumor subclones in a sample.


Using CNVkit with THetA2
````````````````````````

CNVkit provides wrappers for exporting segments to THetA2's input format and
importing THetA2's result file as CNVkit's segmented .cns files.
See the commands :ref:`export_theta` and :ref:`import-theta` for usage
instructions.

After running the CNVkit :doc:`pipeline` on a sample, and calling SNVs jointly
on the tumor and normal samples, generate the THetA2 input files from the .cns
and .vcf files::

    cnvkit.py export theta Sample_T.cns reference.cnn -v Sample_Paired.vcf

This produces three output files: ``Sample_T.interval_count``,
``Sample_T.tumor.snp_formatted.txt``, and
``Sample_T.normal.snp_formatted.txt``.

Then, run THetA2 (assuming the program was unpacked at ``/path/to/theta2/``)::

    # Generates Sample_T.BEST.results:
    /path/to/theta2/bin/RunTHetA Sample_T.interval_count \
        --TUMOR_SNP Sample_T.tumor.snp_formatted.txt \
        --NORMAL_SNP Sample_T.normal.snp_formatted.txt \
        --BAF --NUM_PROCESSES `nproc` --FORCE

Finally, import THetA2's results back into CNVkit's .cns format, matching the
original segmentation (.cns) to the THetA2-inferred absolute copy number
values.::

    cnvkit.py import-theta Sample_T.cns Sample_T.BEST.results

THetA2 adjusts the segment log2 values to the inferred cellularity of each
detected subclone; this can result in one or two .cns files representing
subclones if more than one clonal tumor cell population was detected. THetA2
also performs some significance testing of each segment representing a CNA, so
there may be fewer segments derived from THetA2 than were originally found by
CNVkit.

The segment values are still log2-transformed in the resulting .cns files, for
convenience in plotting etc. with CNVkit. These files are also easily converted
to other formats using the :ref:`export` command.



Adjusting copy ratios and segments for normal cell contamination
----------------------------------------------------------------

CNVkit's :ref:`rescale` command uses an estimate of tumor fraction (from
any source) to directly rescale segment log2 ratio values to the value that
would be seen a completely pure, uncontaminated sample. Example with tumor
purity of 60% and a male reference::

    cnvkit.py rescale Sample.cns --purity 0.6 -y -o Sample.rescale.cns

CNVkit's :ref:`call` command then converts the segmented log2 ratio estimates to
absolute integer copy numbers. Note that the rescaling step is optional; either
way, hard thresholds can be used::

    # With CNVkit's default cutoffs
    cnvkit.py call -m threshold Sample.cns -y -o Sample.call.cns
    # Or, using a custom set of cutoffs
    cnvkit.py call -t=-1.1,-0.4,0.3,0.7 Sample.cns -y -o Sample.call.cns

Alternatively, if the tumor cell fraction is known confidently, then these can
be done in one step with ``call``, using the ``clonal`` method to simply round
the log2 ratios to the nearest integer copy number::

    cnvkit.py call -m clonal Sample.cns -y --purity 0.65 -o Sample.call.cns
    # Or, if already rescaled
    cnvkit.py call -m clonal Sample.rescale.cns -y -o Sample.call.cns

Export integer copy numbers as BED or VCF
-----------------------------------------

The :ref:`export` ``bed`` and ``vcf`` commands emit integer copy number calls in
the standard BED or VCF formats::

    cnvkit.py export bed Sample.call.cns -y -o Sample.bed
    cnvkit.py export vcf Sample.call.cns -y -o Sample.vcf

The rounding of the .cns file's log2 ratios to integer copy numbers here is the
same as in the :ref:`call` command with the ``clonal`` method.

Commit message:

rescale, loh, export bed, export theta: remove deprecated commands & options
Updated the documentation, but more editing is needed.

doc/heterogeneity.rst, after:

Tumor heterogeneity
===================

DNA samples extracted from solid tumors are rarely completely pure. Stromal or
other normal cells and distinct subclonal tumor-cell populations are typically
present in a sample, and can confound attempts to fit segmented log2 ratio
values to absolute integer copy numbers.

CNVkit provides several points of integration with existing tools and methods
for dealing with tumor heterogeneity and normal-cell contamination.

Estimating tumor purity and normal contamination
------------------------------------------------

A rough estimate of tumor purity can usually be obtained using one or more of
these approaches:

1. A pathologist can visually estimate the purity of an sample taken from a
   solid tumor by examination under a microscope, counting stromal and
   neoplastic cells.
2. If the tumor is belived to be driven by a somatic point mutation, e.g. BRAF
   V600E in melanoma, then that mutation is assumed to be fully clonal and its
   allele frequency indicates the tumor purity. This can be complicated by copy
   number alterations at the same site and whether the point mutation is
   homozygous or heterozygous, but the frequencies of other somatic mutations in
   the same sample may resolve this satisfactorily.
3. Larger-scale, hemizygous losses that cover germline heterozygous SNPs shift
   the allele frequencies of the same SNPs as they are present in the tumor
   sample. In a 50% pure tumor sample, for example, these SNP b-allele
   frequencies would shift from 50% to 67% or 33%, assuming a diploid sample
   (i.e. 1 of 2 copies from the normal sample and 0 or 1 of 1 copy from the
   tumor, depending on whether the variant allele was lost or retained). The
   general calculation is a bit more complicated than in #1 or #2, and can be
   done similarly for copy number gains and homozygous deletions.
4. The log2 ratio values of CNAs in a tumor sample correspond to integer copy
   numbers in tumor cells, and in aggregate these log2 values will cluster
   around values that indicate subclone populations, each with a given ploidy
   and clonality. For example, a single-copy loss in a 50% pure tumor sample
   will have 3/4 the coverage of a neutral site (2/2 normal copies, 1/2 tumor
   copies), for a log2 value of log2(.75) = -0.415. This calculation can also be
   generalized to other copy number states.

Software implementations of the latter three approaches can be used directly on
DNA sequencing data.


Inferring tumor purity and subclonal population fractions from sequencing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

While inferring the tumor population structure is currently out of the scope of
CNVkit, this work can be done using other third-party programs such as
`THetA2 <http://compbio.cs.brown.edu/projects/theta/>`_,
`PyClone <http://compbio.bccrc.ca/software/pyclone/>`_, or
`BubbleTree <https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/BubbleTree.html>`_.
Each of these programs can be used to estimate tumor cell content and infer
integer copy number of tumor subclones in a sample.


Using CNVkit with THetA2
````````````````````````

CNVkit provides wrappers for exporting segments to THetA2's input format and
importing THetA2's result file as CNVkit's segmented .cns files.
See the commands :ref:`export_theta` and :ref:`import-theta` for usage
instructions.

After running the CNVkit :doc:`pipeline` on a sample, and calling SNVs jointly
on the tumor and normal samples, generate the THetA2 input files from the .cns
and .vcf files::

    cnvkit.py export theta Sample_T.cns reference.cnn -v Sample_Paired.vcf

This produces three output files: ``Sample_T.interval_count``,
``Sample_T.tumor.snp_formatted.txt``, and
``Sample_T.normal.snp_formatted.txt``.

Then, run THetA2 (assuming the program was unpacked at ``/path/to/theta2/``)::

    # Generates Sample_T.BEST.results:
    /path/to/theta2/bin/RunTHetA Sample_T.interval_count \
        --TUMOR_SNP Sample_T.tumor.snp_formatted.txt \
        --NORMAL_SNP Sample_T.normal.snp_formatted.txt \
        --BAF --NUM_PROCESSES `nproc` --FORCE

Finally, import THetA2's results back into CNVkit's .cns format, matching the
original segmentation (.cns) to the THetA2-inferred absolute copy number
values.::

    cnvkit.py import-theta Sample_T.cns Sample_T.BEST.results

THetA2 adjusts the segment log2 values to the inferred cellularity of each
detected subclone; this can result in one or two .cns files representing
subclones if more than one clonal tumor cell population was detected. THetA2
also performs some significance testing of each segment representing a CNA, so
there may be fewer segments derived from THetA2 than were originally found by
CNVkit.

The segment values are still log2-transformed in the resulting .cns files, for
convenience in plotting etc. with CNVkit. These files are also easily converted
to other formats using the :ref:`export` command.



Adjusting copy ratios and segments for normal cell contamination
----------------------------------------------------------------

.. XXX TODO combine with `call` command details

CNVkit's :ref:`call` command uses an estimate of tumor fraction (from
any source) to directly rescale segment log2 ratio values to the value that
would be seen a completely pure, uncontaminated sample. Example with tumor
purity of 60% and a male reference::

    cnvkit.py call -m none Sample.cns --purity 0.6 -y -o Sample.call.cns

The :ref:`call` command can also convert the segmented log2 ratio estimates to
absolute integer copy numbers. Note that the rescaling step is optional; either
way, hard thresholds can be used::

    # With CNVkit's default cutoffs
    cnvkit.py call -m threshold Sample.cns -y -o Sample.call.cns
    # Or, using a custom set of cutoffs
    cnvkit.py call -t=-1.1,-0.4,0.3,0.7 Sample.cns -y -o Sample.call.cns

Alternatively, if the tumor cell fraction is known confidently, then these can
be done in one step with ``call``, using the ``clonal`` method to simply round
the log2 ratios to the nearest integer copy number::

    cnvkit.py call -m clonal Sample.cns -y --purity 0.65 -o Sample.call.cns
    # Or, if already rescaled
    cnvkit.py call -m clonal Sample.call.cns -y -o Sample.call.cns

Export integer copy numbers as BED or VCF
-----------------------------------------

The :ref:`export` ``bed`` and ``vcf`` commands emit integer copy number calls in
the standard BED or VCF formats::

    cnvkit.py export bed Sample.call.cns -y -o Sample.bed
    cnvkit.py export vcf Sample.call.cns -y -o Sample.vcf

The rounding of the .cns file's log2 ratios to integer copy numbers here is the
same as in the :ref:`call` command with the ``clonal`` method.

.. XXX TODO note if call was already run, takes copy numbers from the "cn" column
